Sita and the River
THE ISLAND IN THE RIVER
In the middle of the river, the river that began in the mountains of the Himalayas and ended in the Bay
of Bengal, there was a small island. The river swept round the island, sometimes clawing at its banks
but never going right over it. The river was still deep and swift at this point, because the foothills
were only forty miles distant. More than twenty years had passed since the river had flooded the
island, and at that time no one had lived there. But ten years ago a small family had came to live on
the island, and now a small hut stood on it, mud-walled hut with a sloping thatched roof. The hut had
been built into a huge rock. Only three of its walls were mud, the fourth was rock.
A few goats grazed on the short grass and the prickly leaves of the thistle. Some hens followed
them about. There was a melon patch and a vegetable patch and a small field of marigolds. The
marigolds were sometimes made into garlands, and the garlands were sold during weddings or
festivals in the nearby town.
In the middle of the islands stood a peepul tree. It was the only tree on this tongue of land. But
peepul trees will grow anywhere — through the walls of old temples, through gravestones, even from
rooftops. It is usually the buildings, and not the trees, that give way!
Even during the great flood, which had occurred twenty years back, the peepul tree had stood firm.
It was an old tree, much older than the old man on the island, who was only seventy. The peepul
was about three hundred. It also provided shelter for the birds who sometimes visited it from the
mainland.
Three hundred years ago, the land on which the peepul tree stood had been part of the mainland;
but the river had changed its course, and that bit of land with the tree on it had become an island. The
tree had lived alone for many years. Now it gave shade and shelter to a small family, who were
grateful for its presence.
The people of India love peepul trees, especially during the hot summer months when the heartshaped leaves catch the least breath of air and flutter eagerly, fanning those who sit beneath.
A sacred tree, the peepul, the abode of spirits, good and bad.
‘Do not yawn when you are sitting beneath the tree,’ Grandmother would warn Sita, her ten-year
old granddaughter. ‘And if you must yawn always snap your fingers in front of your mouth. If you
forget to do that, a demon might jump down your throat!’
‘And then what will happen?’ asked Sita.
‘He will probably ruin your digestion,’said Grandfather, who didn’t take demons very seriously.
The peepul had beautiful leaf, and Grandmother likened it to the body of the mighty god Krishna —
broad at the shoulders, then tapering down to a very slim waist.
The tree attracted birds and insects from across the river. On some nights it was full of fireflies.
Whenever Grandmother saw the fireflies, she told her favourite story.
‘When we first came here,’she said, ‘we were greatly troubled by mosquitoes. One night your
grandfather rolled himself up in his sheet so that they couldn’t get at him. After a while he peeped out
of his bedsheet to make sure they were gone. He saw a firefly and said, You clever mosquito! You
could not see in the dark, so you got a lantern!’
Grandfather was mending a fishing-net. He had fished in the river for ten years, and he was a good
fisherman. He knew where to find to slim silver chilwa and the big, beautiful masheer and the
singhara with its long whiskers; he knew where the river was deep and where it was shallow; he
knew which baits to use — when to use worms and when to use gram. He had taught his son to fish,
but his son had gone to work in a factory in a city, nearly a hundred miles away. He had no grandson;
but he had a granddaughter, Sita, and she could do all the things a boy could do, and sometimes she
could do them better. She had lost her mother when she was two or three. Grandmother had taught her
all that a girl should know — cooking, sewing, grinding spices, cleaning the house, feeding the birds
— and Grandfather had taught her other things, like taking a small boat across the river, cleaning a
fish, repairing a net, or catching a snake by the tail! And some things she had learnt by herself—like
climbing the peepul tree, or leaping from rock to rock in shallow water, or swimming in an inlet
where the water was calm.
Neither grandparent could read or write, and as a result Sita couldn’t read or write.
There was a school in one of the villages across the river, but Sita had never seen it. She had never
been further than Shahganj, the small market town near the river. She had never seen a city. She had
never been in a train. The river cut her off from many things; but she could not miss what she had
never known, and besides, she was much too busy.
While Grandfather mended his net, Sita was inside the hut, pressing her grandmother’s forehead
which was hot with fever. Grandmother had been ill for three days and could not eat. She had been ill
before, but she had never been so bad. Grandfather had brought her some sweet oranges from
Shahganj, and she could suck the juice from the oranges, but she couldn’t take anything else.
She was younger than Grandfather, but, because she was sick, she looked much older. She had
never been very strong. She coughed a lot, and sometimes she had difficulty in breathing.
When Sita noticed that Grandmother was sleeping, she left the bedside and tip-toed out of the room
on her bare feet.
Outside, she found the sky dark with monsoon clouds. It had rained all night, and, in a few hours, it
would rain again. The monsoon rains had come early, at the end of June. Now it was the end of July,
and already the river was swollen. Its rushing sound seemed nearer and more menacing than usual.
Sita went to her grandfather and sat down beside him.
‘When you are hungry, tell me,’she said, ‘and I will make the bread.’
‘Is your Grandmother asleep?’
‘Yes. But she will wake soon. The pain is deep.’
The old man stared out across the river, at the dark green of the forest, at the leaden sky, and said,
‘If she is not better by morning, I will take her to the hospital in Shahganj. They will know how to
make her well. You may be on your own for two or three days. You have been on your own before.’
Sita nodded gravely — she had been alone before; but not in the middle of the rains, with the river
so high. But she knew that someone must stay behind. She wanted Grandmother to get well, and she
knew that only Grandfather could take the small boat across the river when the current was so strong.
Sita was not afraid of being left alone, but she did not like the look of the river. That morning, when
she had been fetching water, she had noticed that the lever suddenly disappeared.
‘Grandfather, if the river rises higher, what will I do?’
‘You must keep to the high ground.’
‘And if the water reaches the high ground?’
‘Then go into the hut, and take the hens with you.’
‘And if the water comes into the hut?’
‘Then climb into the peepul tree. It is a strong tree. It will not fall. And the water cannot rise higher
than the tree.’
‘And the goats, Grandfather?’
‘I will be taking them with me. I may have to sell them, to pay for good food and medicine for your
Grandmother. As for the hens, you can put them on the roof if the water enters the hut. But do not
worry too much’ — and he patted Sita’s head — ‘the water will not rise so high. Has it ever done so?
I will be back soon, remember that.’
‘And won’t Grandmother come back?’
‘Yes — but they may keep her in the hospital for some time.’
THE SOUND OF THE RIVER
That evening it began to rain again. Big pellets of rain, scarring the surface of the river. But it was
warm rain, and Sita could move about in it. She was not afraid of getting wet, she rather liked it. In
the previous month, when the first monsoon shower had arrived, washing the dusty leaves of the tree
and bringing up the good smell of the earth, she had exulted in it, had run about shouting for joy. She
was used to it now, even a little tired of the rain, but she did not mind getting wet. It was steamy
indoors, and her thin dress would soon dry in the heat from the kitchen fire.
She walked about barefooted, barelegged. She was very sure on her feet; her toes had grown
accustomed to gripping all kinds of rocks, slippery of sharp. And though thin, she was surprisingly
strong.
Black hair, streaming across her face. Black eyes. Slim brown arms. A scar on her thigh: when she
was small, visiting her mother’s village, a hyaena had entered the house where she was sleeping,
fastened on to her leg and tried to drag her away; but her screams had roused the villagers, and the
hyaena had run off.
She moved about in the pouring rain, chasing the hens into a shelter behind the hut. A harmless
brown snake, flooded out of its hole, was moving across the open ground. Sita took a stick, picked the
snake up with it, and dropped it behind a cluster of rocks. She had no quarrel with snakes. They kept
down the rats and the frogs. She wondered how the rats had first come to the island — probably in
someone’s boat or in a sack of grain.
She disliked the huge black scorpions who left their waterlogged dwellings and tried to take
shelter in the hut. It was so easy to step on one, and the sting could be very painful. She had been
bitten by a scorpion the previous monsoon, and for a day and a night she had known fever and great
pain. Sita had never killed living creatures, but now, whenever she found a scorpion, she crushed it
with a rock!
When, finally, she went indoors, she was hungry. She ate some parched gram and warmed up some
goats’ milk.
Grandmother woke once, and asked for water, and Grandfather held the brass tumbler to her lips.
It rained all night.
The roof was leaking, and a small puddle formed on the floor. Grandfather kept the kerosene-lamps
alight. They did not need the light but somehow it made them feel safer.
The sound of the river had always been with them, although they seldom noticed it; but that night
they noticed a change in its sound. There was something like a moan, like a wind in the tops of tall
trees, and a swift hiss as the water swept round the rocks and carried away pebbles. And sometimes
there was a rumble, as loose earth fell into the water. Sita could not sleep.
She had a rag doll, made with Grandmother’s help out of bits of old clothing. She kept it by her
side everynight. The doll was someone to talk to, when the nights were long and sleep elusive. Her
grandparents were often ready to talk; but sometimes Sita wanted to have secrets, and, though there
were no special secrets in her life, she made up a few because it was fun to have them. And if you
have secrets, you must have a friend to share them with. Since there were no other children on the
island, Sita shared her secrets with the rag doll, whose name was Mumta.
Grandfather and Grandmother were asleep, though the sound of Grandmother’s laboured breathing
was almost as persistent as the sound of the river.
‘Mumta,’ whispered Sita in the dark, starting one of her private conversations. ‘Do you think
Grandmother will get well again?’
Mumta always answered Sita’s questions, even though the answers were really Sita’s answers.
‘She is very old,’said Mumta.
‘Do you think the river will reach the hut?’ asked Sita.
‘If it keeps raining like this, and the river keeps rising, it will reach the hut.’
‘I am afraid of the river, Mumta. Aren’t you afraid?’
‘Don’t be afraid. The river has always been good to us.’
‘What will we do if it comes into the hut?’
‘We will climb on the roof.’
‘And if it reaches the roof?’
‘We will climb the peepul tree. The river has never gone higher than the peepul tree.’
As soon as the first light showed through the little skylight, Sita got up and went outside. It wasn’t
raining hard, it was drizzling, but it was the sort of drizzle that could continue for days, and it
probably meant that heavy rain was falling in the hills where the river began.
Sita went down to the water’s edge. She couldn’t find her favourite rock, the one on which she
often sat dangling her feet in the water, watching the little chilwa fish swim by. It was still there, no
doubt, but the river had gone over it.
She stood on the sand, and she could feel the water oozing and bubbling beneath her feet.
The river was no longer green and blue and flecked with white; it was a muddy colour.
She went back to the hut. Grandfather was up now. He was getting his boat ready.
Sita milked the goat, thinking that perhaps it was the last time she would be milking it; but she did
not care for the goat in the same way that she cared for Mumta.
The sun was just coming up when Grandfather pushed off in the boat. Grandmother lay in the prow.
She was staring hard at Sita, trying to speak, but the words would not come. She raised her hand in a
blessing.
Sita bent and touched her Grandmother’s feet, and then Grandfather pushed off. The little boat —
with its two old people and three goats — rode swiftly on the river, edging its way towards the
opposite bank. The current was very swift, and the boat would be carried about half-a-mile
downstream before Grandfather would be able to get it to dry land.
It bobbed about on the water, getting smaller and smaller, until it was just a speck on the broad
river.
And suddenly Sita was alone.
There was a wind, whipping the raindrops against her face; and there was the water, rushing past
the island; and there was the distant shore, blurred by rain; and there was the small hut; and there was
the tree.
Sita got busy. The hens had to be fed. They weren’t concerned about anything except food. Sita
threw them handfuls of coarse grain, potato-peels and peanut-shells.
Then she took the broom and swept out the hut; lit the charcoal-burner, warmed some milk, and
thought, ‘Tomorrow there will be no milk …’ She began peeling onions. Soon her eyes started
smarting, and, pausing for a few moments and glancing round the quiet room, she became aware again
that she was alone. Grandfather’s hookah-pipe stood by itself in one corner. It was a beautiful old
hookah, which had belonged to Sita’s great-grandfather. The bowl was made out of a coconut
encased in silver. The long winding stem was at least four feet long. It was their most treasured
possession. Grandmother’s sturdy shisham-wood walking stick stood in another corner.
Sita looked around for Mumta, found the doll beneath the light wooden charpoy, and placed her
within sight and hearing.
Thunder rolled down from the hills. Boom — boom — boom …
‘The Gods of the mountains are angry,’said Sita. ‘Do you think they are angry with me?’
‘Why should they be angry with you?’ asked Mumta.
‘They don’t need a reason for being angry. They are angry with everything, and we are in the
middle of everything. We are so small — do you think they know we are here?’
‘Who knows what the Gods think?’
‘But I made you,’said Sita, ‘and I know you are here.’
‘And will you save me if the river rises?’
‘Yes, of course. I won’t go anywhere without you, Mumta.’
THE WATER RISES
Sita couldn’t stay indoors for long. She went out, taking Mumta with her, and stared out across the
river, to the safe land on the other side. But was it really safe there? The river looked much wider
now. It had crept over its banks and spread far across the flat plain. Far away, people were driving
their cattle through waterlogged, flooded fields, carrying their belongings in bundles on their heads or
shoulders, leaving their homes, making for high land. It wasn’t safe anywhere.
Sita wondered what had happened to Grandfather and Grandmother. If they had reached the shore
safely, Grandfather would have to engage a bullock-cart or a pony-drawn ekka to get Grandmother to
the district hospital, five or six miles away. Shahganj had a market, a court, a jail, a cinema, and a
hospital.
She wondered if she would ever see Grandmother again. She had done her best to look after the
old lady, remembering the times when Grandmother had looked after her, had gently touched her
fevered brow, and had told her stories — stories about the Gods — about the young Krishna, friend
of birds and animals, so full of mischief, always causing confusion among the other Gods. He made
the God Indra angry by shifting a mountain without permission. Indra was the God of the clouds, who
made the thunder and lightning, and when he was angry he sent down a deluge such as this one.
The island looked much smaller now. Some of its mud banks had dissolved quickly, sinking into the
river. But in the middle of the island there was rocky ground, and the rocks would never crumble, they
could only be submerged.
Sita climbed into the tree to get a better view of the flood. She had climbed the tree many times,
and it took her only a few seconds to reach the higher branches. She put her hand to her eyes as a
shield from the rain, and gazed upstream.
There was water everywhere. The world had become one vast river. Even the trees on the forested
side of the river looked as though they had grown from the water, like mangroves. The sky was
banked with massive, moisture-laden clouds. Thunder rolled down from the hills, and the river
seemed to take it up with a hollow booming sound.
Something was floating down the river, something big and bloated. It was closer now, and Sita
could make out its bulk — a drowned bullock, being carried downstream.
So the water had already flooded the villages further upstream. Or perhaps the bullock had strayed
too close to the rising river.
Sita’s worst fears were confirmed when, a little later, she saw planks of wood, small trees and
bushes, and then a wooden bedstead, floating past the island.
As she climbed down from the tree, it began to rain more heavily. She ran indoors, shooing the
hens before her. They flew into the hut and huddled under Grandmother’s cot. Sita thought it would be
best to keep them together now.
There were three hens and a cockbird. The river did not bother them. They were interested only in
food, and Sita kept them content by throwing them a handful of onion-skins.
She would have liked to close the door and shut out the swish of the rain and the boom of the river;
but then she would have no way of knowing how fast the water rose.
She took Mumta in her arms and began praying for the rain to stop and the river to fall. She prayed
to the God Indra, and, just in case he was busy elsewhere, she prayed to other Gods too. She prayed
for the safety of her grandparents and for her own safety. She put herself last — but only after an
effort!
Finally Sita decided to make herself a meal. So she chopped up some onions, fried them, then
added turmeric and red chilli-powder, salt and water, and stirred until she had everything sizzling;
and then she added a cup of lentils and covered the pot.
Doing this took her about ten minutes. It would take about half-an-hour for the dish to cook.
When she looked outside, she saw pools of water among the rocks. She couldn’t tell if it was rain
water or overflow from the river.
She had an idea.
A big tin trunk stood in a corner of the room. In it Grandmother kept an old single-thread sewingmachine. It had belonged once to an English lady, had found its way to a Shahganj junk-yard, and had
been rescued by Grandfather who had paid fifteen rupees for it. It was just over a hundred years old,
but it could still be used.
The trunk also contained an old sword. This had originally belonged to Sita’s great-grandfather,
who had used it to help defend his village against marauding Rohilla soldiers more than a century
ago. Sita could tell that it had been used to fight with, because there were several small dents in the
steel blade.
But there was no time for Sita to start admiring family heirlooms. She decided to stuff the trunk
with everything useful or valuable. There was a chance that it wouldn’t be carried away by the water.
Grandfather’s hookah went into the trunk. Grandmother’s walking-stick went in, too. So did a
number of small tins containing the spices used in cooking — nutmeg, caraway seed, cinnamon,
corrainder, pepper — also a big tin of flour and another of molasses. Even if she had to spend several
hours in the tree, there would be something to eat when she came down again.
A clean white cotton dhoti of Grandfather’s, and Grandmother’s only spare sari also went into the
trunk. Never mind if they got stained with curry powder! Never mind if they got the smell of salted
fish — some of that went in, too.
Sita was so busy packing the trunk that she paid no attention to the lick of cold water at her heels.
She locked the trunk, dropped the key into a crack in the rock wall, and turned to give her attention to
the food. It was only then that she discovered that she was walking about on a watery floor.
She stood still, horrified by what she saw. The water was oozing over the door-sill, pushing its
way into the room.
In her fright, Sita forgot about her meal and everything else. Darting out of the hut, she ran splashing
through ankle-deep water toward the safety of the peepul tree. If the tree hadn’t been there, such a
well-known landmark, she might have floundered into deep water, into the river.
She climbed swiftly into the strong arms of the tree, made herself comfortable on a familiar branch,
and thrust the wet hair away from her eyes.
THE TREE
She was glad she had hurried. The hut was, now surrounded by water. Only the higher parts of the
island could still be seen —a few rocks, the big rock into which the hut was built, a hillock on which
some brambles and thorn-apples grew.
The hens hadn’t bothered to leave the hut. Instead, they were perched on the wooden bedstead.
‘Will the river rise still higher?’ wondered Sita. She had never seen it like this before. With a deep,
muffled roar it swirled around her, stretching away in all directions.
The most unusual things went by on the water — an aluminium kettle, a cane-chair, a tin of toothpowder, an empty cigarette packet, a wooden slipper, a plastic doll …
A doll!
With a sinking feeling, Sita remembered Mumta.
Poor Mumta, she had been left behind in the hut. Sita, in her hurry; had forgotten her only
companion.
She climbed down from the tree and ran splashing through the water towards the hut. Already the
current was pulling at her legs. When she reached the hut, she found it full of water. The hens had
gone — and so had Mumta.
Sita struggled back to the tree. She was only just in time, for the waters were higher now, the island
fast disappearing.
She crouched miserably in the fork of the tree, watching her world disappear.
She had always loved the river. Why was it threatening her now? She remembered the doll, and she
thought, ‘If I can be so careless with someone I have made, how can I expect the gods to notice me?’
Something went floating past the tree. Sita caught a glimpse of a stiff, upraised arm and long hair
streaming behind on the water. The body of a drowned woman. It was soon gone, but it made Sita feel
very small and lonely, at the mercy of great and cruel forces. She began to shiver and then to cry.
She stopped crying when she saw an empty kerosene tin, with one of the hens perched on top. The
tin came bobbing along on the water and sailed slowly past the tree. The hen looked a bit ruffled but
seemed secure on its perch.
A little later Sita saw the remaining hens fly up to the rock-ledge to huddle there in a small recess.
The water was still rising. All that remained of the island was the big rock behind the hut, and the
top of the hut, and the peepul tree.
She climbed a little higher, into the crook of a branch. A jungle-crow settled in the branches above
her. Sita saw the nest, the crow’s nest, an untidy platform of twigs wedged in the fork of a branch.
In the nest were four speckled eggs. The crow sat on them and cawed disconsolately. But though
the bird sounded miserable its presence brought some cheer to Sita. At least she was not alone. Better
to have a crow for company than no one at all.
Other things came floating out of the hut — a large pumpkin; a red turban belonging to Grandfather,
unwinding in the water like a long snake; and then — Mumta!
The doll, being filled with straw and wood shavings moved quite swiftly on the water, too swiftly
for Sita to do anything about rescuing it. Sita wanted to call out, to urge her friend to make for the
tree; but she knew that Mumta could not swim — the doll could only float, travel with the river, and
perhaps be washed ashore many miles downstream.
The trees shook in the wind and the rain. The crow cawed and flew up, circled the tree a few
times, then returned to the nest. Sita clung to the branch.
The tree trembled throughout its tall frame. To Sita it felt like an earthquake tremor; she felt the
shudder of the tree in her own bones.
The river swirled all around her now. It was almost up to the roof of the hut. Soon the mud walls
would crumble and vanish. Except for the big rock and some trees very far away, there was only
water to be seen. Water, and grey weeping sky.
In the distance, a boat with several people in it moved sluggishly away from the ruins of a flooded
village. Someone looked out across the flooded river and said, ‘See, there is a tree right in the middle
of the river! How could it have got there? Isn’t someone moving in the tree?’
But the others thought he was imagining things it was only a tree carried down by the flood, they
said. In worrying about their own distress, they had forgotten about the island in the middle of the
river.
The river was very angry now, rampaging down from the hills and thundering across the plain,
bringing with it dead animals, uprooted trees, household goods, and huge fish choked to death by the
swirling mud.
The peepul tree groaned. Its long, winding roots still clung tenaciously to the earth from which it
had sprung many, many years ago. But the earth was softening, the stones were being washed away.
The roots of the tree were rapidly losing their hold.
The crow must have known that something was wrong because it kept flying up and circling the
tree, reluctant to settle in it, yet unwilling to fly away. As long as the nest was there, the crow would
remain too.
Sita’s wet cotton dress clung to her thin body. The rain streamed down from her long black hair. It
poured from every leaf of the tree. The crow, too, was drenched and groggy.
The tree groaned and moved again.
There was a flurry of leaves, then a surge of mud from below. To Sita it seemed as though the river
was rising to meet the sky. The tree tilted swinging Sita from side to side. Her feet were in the water
but she clung tenaciously to her branch.
And then, she found the tree moving, moving with the river, rocking her about, dragging its roots
along the ground as it set out on the first and last journey of its life.
And as the tree moved out on the river and the little island was lost in the swirling waters, Sita
forgot her fear and her loneliness. The tree was taking her with it. She was not alone. It was as though
one of the gods had remembered her after all.
TAKEN WITH THE FLOOD
The branches swung Sita about, but she did not lose her grip. The tree was her friend. It had known
her all these years, and now it held her in its old and dying arms as though it were determined to keep
her from the river.
The crow kept flying around the moving tree. The bird was in a great rage. Its nest was still up
there — but not for long! The tree lurched and twisted, and the nest fell into the water. Sita saw the
eggs sink.
The crow swooped low over the water but there was nothing it could do. In a few moments the nest
had disappeared.
The bird followed the tree for some time; then, flapping its wings, it rose high into the air and flew
across the river until it was out of sight.
Sita was alone once more. But there was no time for feeling lonely. Everything was in motion —
up and down and sideways and forwards.
She saw a turtle swimming past — a great big river turtle, the kind that feeds on decaying flesh.
Sita turned her face away. In the distance she saw a flooded village and people in flat-bottomed
boats; but they were very far.
Because of its great size, the tree did not move very swiftly on the river. Sometimes, when it
reached shallow water, it stopped, its roots catching in the rocks; but not for long: the river’s
momentum soon swept it on.
At one place, where there was a bend in the river, the tree struck a sandbank and was still. It would
not move again.
Sita felt very tired. Her arms were aching and she had to cling tightly to her branch to avoid
slipping into the water. The rain blurred her vision. She wondered if she should brave the current and
try swimming to safety. But she did not want to leave the tree. It was all that was left to her now, and
she felt safe in its branches.
Then, above the sound of the river, she heard someone calling. The voice was faint and seemed
very far but, looking upriver through the curtain of rain, Sita was able to make out a small boat
coming towards her.
There was a boy in the boat. He seemed quite at home on the turbulent river, and he was smiling at
Sita as he guided his boat towards the tree. He held on to one of the branches to steady himself, and
gave his free hand to Sita.
She grasped the outstretched hand and slipped into the boat beside the boy.
He placed his bare foot against the trunk of the tree and pushed away.
The little boat moved swiftly down the river. Sita looked back and saw the big tree lying on its
side on the sandbank, while the river swirled round it and pulled at its branches, carrying away its
beautiful slender leaves.
And then the tree grew smaller and was left far behind. A new journey had begun.
THE BOY IN THE BOAT
She lay stretched out in the boat, too tired to talk, too tired to move. The boy looked at her but he did
not say anything, he just kept smiling. He leant on his two small oars, stroking smoothly, rhythmically,
trying to keep from going into the middle of the river. He wasn’t strong enough to get the boat right out
of the swift current; but he kept trying.
A small boat on a big river — a river that had broken its bounds and reached across the plains in
every direction — the boat moved swiftly on the wild brown water, and the girl’s home and the boy’s
home were both left far behind.
The boy wore only a loincloth. He was a slim, wiry boy, with a hard flat belly. He had high
cheekbones, strong white teeth. He was a little darker than Sita.
He did not speak until they reached a broader, smoother stretch of river, and then, resting on his
oars and allowing the boat to drift a little, he said, ‘You live on the island. I have seen you sometimes,
from my boat. But where are the others?’
‘My grandmother was sick,’said Sita. ‘Grandfather took her to the hospital in Shahganj.’
‘When did they leave?’
‘Early this morning.’
Early that morning — and already Sita felt as though it had been many mornings ago!
‘Where are you from?’she asked.
‘I am from a village near the foothills. About six miles from your home. I was in my boat, trying to
get across the river with the news that our village was badly flooded. The current was too strong. I
was swept down and past your island. We cannot fight the river when it is like this, we must go where
it takes us.’
‘You must be tired,’said Sita. Give me the oars.’
‘No. There is not much to do now. The river has gone wherever it wanted to go — it will not drive
us before it any more.’
He brought in one oar, and with his free hand felt under the seat, where there was a small basket.
He produced two mangoes, and gave one to Sita.
‘I was supposed to sell these in Shahganj,’ he said. ‘My father is very strict. Even if I return home
safely, he will ask me what I got for the mangoes!’
‘And what will you tell him?’
‘I will say they are at the bottom of the river!’
They bit deep into the ripe fleshy mangoes, using their teeth to tear the skin away. The sweet juice
trickled down their skins. The good smell — like the smell of the leaves of the cosmos-flower when
crushed between the palms — helped to revive Sita. The flavour of the fruit was heavenly — truly the
nectar of the gods!
Sita hadn’t tasted a mango for over a year. For a few moments she forgot about everything else. All
that mattered was the sweet, dizzy flavour of the mango.
The boat drifted, but slowly now, for as they went further down-stream, the river gradually lost its
power and fury. It was late afternoon when the rain stopped; but the clouds did not break up.
‘My father has many buffaloes,’said the boy, ‘but several have been lost in the flood.’
‘Do you go to school?’ asked Sita.
‘Yes, I am supposed to go to school. I don’t always go, at least, not when the weather is fine! There
is a school near our village. I don’t think you go to school?’
‘No. There is too much work at home.’
‘Can you read and write?’
‘Only a little …’
‘Then you should go to a school.’
‘It is too far away.’
‘True. But you should know how to read and write. Otherwise you will be stuck on your island for
the rest of your life — that is, if your island is still there!’
‘But I like the island,’ protested Sita.
‘Because you are with people you love,’said the boy. ‘But your grandparents, they are old, they
must die some day — and then you will be alone, and will you like the island then?’
Sita did not answer. She was trying to think of what life would be like without her grandparents. It
would be an empty island, that was true. She would be imprisoned by the river.
‘I can help you,’said the boy. ‘When we get back — if we get back — I will come to see you
sometimes, and I will teach you to read and write. All right?’
‘Yes,’said Sita, nodding thoughtfully. ‘When we get back …’
The boy smiled.
‘My name is Vijay,’ he said.
Towards evening the river changed colour. The sun, low in the sky, broke through a rift in the
clouds, and the river changed slowly from grey to gold, from gold to a deep orange, and then, as the
sun went down, all these colours were drowned in the river, and the river took the colour of the night.
The moon was almost at the full, and they could see a belt of forest along the line of the river.
‘I will try to reach the trees,’said Vijay.
He pulled for the trees, and after ten minutes of strenuous rowing reached a bend in the river and
was able to escape the pull of the main current.
Soon they were in a forest, rowing between tall trees, Sal and Shisham.
The boat moved slowly as Vijay took it in and out of the trees, while the moonlight made a crooked
silver path over the water.
‘We will tie the boat to tree,’ he said. ‘Then we can rest. Tomorrow, we will have to find out way
out of the forest.’
He produced a length of rope from the bottom of the boat, tied one end to the boat’s stern, and
threw the other end over a stout branch which hung only a few feet above the water. The boat came to
rest against the trunk of the tree.
It was tall, sturdy tree, The Indian mahogany. It was a safe place, for there was no rush of water in
the forest; and the trees grew close together, making the earth firm and unyielding.
But those who lived in the forest were on the move. The animals had been flooded out of their
holes, caves and lairs, and were looking for shelter and high ground.
Sita and Vijay had just finished tying the boat to the tree when they saw a huge python gliding over
the water towards them.
‘Do you think it will try to get into the boat?’ asked Sita.
‘I don’t think so,’said Vijay, although he took the precaution of holding an oar ready to fend off the
snake.
But the python went past them, its head above water, its great length trailing behind, until it was
lost in the shadows.
Vijay had more mangoes in the basket, and he and Sita sucked hungrily at them while they sat in the
boat.
A big Sambhur-stag came threshing through the water. He did not have to swim: he was so tall that
his head and shoulders remained well above the water. His antlers were big and beautiful.
‘There will be other animals,’said Sita. ‘Should we climb onto the tree?’
‘We are quite safe in the boat,’said Vijay. The animals will not be dangerous tonight. They will not
even hunt each other, they are only interested in reaching dry land. For once, the deer are safe from
the tiger and the leopard. You lie down and sleep, I will keep watch.’
Sita stretched herself out in the boat and closed her eyes. She was very tired, and the sound of the
water lapping against the sides of the boat soon lulled her to sleep.
She woke once, when a strange bird called overhead. She raised herself on one elbow; but Vijay
was awake, sitting beside her, his legs drawn up and his chin resting on his knees. He was gazing out
across the water. He looked blue in the moonlight, the colour of the young god Krishna, and for a few
moments Sita was confused and wondered if the boy was actually Krishna; but when she thought
about it, she decided that it wasn’t possible, he was just a village boy and she had seen hundreds like
him —well, not exactly like him; he was a little different …
And when she slept again, she dreamt that the boy and Krishna were one, and that she was sitting
beside him on a great white bird, which flew over the mountains, over the snow peaks of the
Himalayas, into the cloud-land of the gods. And there was a great rumbling sound, as though the gods
were angry about the whole thing, and she woke up to this terrible sound and looked about her, and
there in the moonlit glade, up to his belly in water, stood a young elephant, his trunk raised as he
trumpeted his predicament to the forest — for he was a young elephant, and he was lost, and was
looking for his mother.
He trumpeted again, then lowered his head and listened. And presently, from far away, came the
shrill trumpeting of another elephant. It must have been the young one’s mother, because he gave
several excited trumpet calls, and then went stamping and churning through the flood-water toward a
gap in the trees. The boat rocked in the waves made by his passing.
‘It is all right,’said Vijay. ‘You can go to sleep again.’
‘I don’t think I will sleep now,’said Sita.
‘Then I will play my flute for you and the time will pass quickly.’
He produced a flute from under the seat, and putting it to his lips he began to play. And the sweetest
music that Sita had ever heard came pouring from the little flute, and it seemed to fill the forest with
its beautiful sound. And the music carried her away again, into the land of dreams, and they were
riding on the bird once more, Sita and the blue god, and they were passing through cloud and mist,
until suddenly the sun shot through the clouds. And at that moment Sita opened her eyes and saw the
sky through the branches of the mahogany tree, the shiny green leaves making a bold pattern against
the blinding blue of an open sky.
The forest was drenched with sunshine. Clouds were gathering again, but for an-hour-or-two there
would be hot sun on a steamy river.
Vijay was fast asleep in the bottom of the boat. His flute lay in the palm of his half-open hand. The
sun came slating across his bare brown legs. A leaf had fallen on his face, but it had not woken him, it
lay on his cheek as though it had grown there.
Sita did not move about, as she did not want to wake the boy. Instead she looked around her, and
she thought the water level had fallen in the night, but she couldn’t be sure.
Vijay woke at last. He yawned, stretched his limbs, and sat up beside Sita.
‘I am hungry,’ he said.
‘So am I,’said Sita.
‘The last mangoes,’ he said, emptying the basket of its last two mangoes.
After they had finished the fruit, they sucked the big seeds until they were quite dry. The discarded
seeds floated well on the water. Sita had always preferred them to paper-boats.
‘We had better move on,’said Vijay.
He rowed the boat through the trees, and then for about an hour they were passing through the
flooded forest, under the dripping branches of rain washed trees. Sometimes they had to use the oars
to push away vines and creepers. Sometimes submerged bushes hampered them. But they were out of
the forest before ten o’clock.
The water was no longer very deep, and they were soon gliding over flooded fields. In the distance
they saw a village standing on high ground. In the old days, people had built their villages on hill tops
as a better defence against bandits and the soldiers of invading armies. This was an old village; and,
though its inhabitants had long ago exchanged their swords for pruning-forks, the hill on which it
stood gave it protection from the flood waters.
A BULLOCK-CART RIDE
The people of the village were at first reluctant to help Sita and Vijay.
‘They are strangers,’said an old woman. ‘They are not of our people.’
‘They are of low-caste,’said another. ‘They cannot remain with us.’
‘Nonsense!’said a tall, turbaned farmer, twirling his long white moustache. ‘They are children, not
robbers. They will come into my house.’
The people of the village — long-limbed, sturdy men and women of the Jat race — were generous
by nature, and once the elderly farmer had given them the lead they were friendly and helpful.
Sita was anxious to get to her grandparents; and the farmer, who had business to transact at a
village fair some twenty miles distant, offered to take Sita and Vijay with him.
The fair was being held at a place called Karauli, and at Karauli there was a railway station, and a
train went to Shahganj.
It was a journey that Sita would always remember. The bullock-cart was so slow on the
waterlogged roads that there was plenty of time in which to see things, to notice one another, to talk,
to think, to dream.
Vijay couldn’t sit still in the cart. He was used to the swift, gliding movements of his boat (which
he had had to leave behind in the village), and every now and then he would jump off the cart and
walk beside it, often ankle-deep in water.
There were four of them in the cart. Sita and Vijay, Hukam Singh, the Jat farmer; and his son,
Phambiri, a mountain of a man who was going to take part in the wrestling-matches at the fair.
Hukam Singh, who drove the bullocks, liked to talk. He had been a soldier in the British Indian
Army during the First World War, and had been with his regiment to Italy and Mesopotamia.
‘There is nothing to compare with soldiering,’ he said, ‘except, of course, farming. If you can’t be a
farmer, be a soldier. Are you listening, boy? Which will you be — farmer or soldier?’
‘Neither,’said Vijay. ‘I shall be an engineer!’
Hukam Singh’s long moustaches seemed almost to bristle with indignation.
‘An engineer! What next! what does your father do, boy?’
‘He keeps buffaloes.’
‘Ah! And his son would be an engineer? … Well, well, the world isn’t what it used to be! No one
knows his rightful place any more. Men sent their children to schools, and what is the result?
Engineers! And who will look after the buffaloes, while you are engineering?’
‘I will sell the buffaloes,’said Vijay, adding rather cheekily: ‘Perhaps you will buy one of them,
Subedar-Sahib!’
He took the cheek out of his remark by adding ‘Subedar-Sahib,’ the rank of a non-commissioned
officer in the old Army. Hukam Singh, who had never reached this rank, was naturally flattered.
‘Fortunately, Phambiri hasn’t been to school! He’ll be a farmer, and a fine one too.’
Phambiri simply grunted, which could have meant anything. He hadn’t studied further than Class
six, which was just as well, as he was a man of muscle, not brain.
Phambiri loved putting his strength to some practical and useful purpose. Whenever the cart wheels
got stuck in the mud, he would get off, remove his shirt, and put his shoulder to the side of the cart,
while his muscles bulged and the sweat glistened on his broad back.
‘Phambiri is the strongest man in our district,’said Hukum Singh proudly. ‘And clever, too! It takes
quick thinking to win a wrestling match.’
‘I have never seen one,’said Sita.
‘Then stay with us tomorrow morning, and you will see Phambiri wrestle. He has been challenged
by the Karauli champion. It will be a great fight!’
‘We must see Phambiri win,’said Vijay.
‘Will there be time?’ asked Sita.
‘Why not? The train for Shahganj won’t come in till evening. The fair goes on all day, and the
wrestling bouts will take place in the morning.’
‘Yes, you must see me win!’ exclaimed Phambiri, thumping himself on the chest as he climbed back
on to the cart after freeing the wheels. ‘No one can defeat me!’
‘How can you be so certain?’ asked Vijay.
‘He has to be certain,’said Hukam Singh. ‘I have taught him to be certain! You can’t win anything
if you are uncertain … Isn’t that right, Phambiri? You know you are going to win!’
‘I know,’said Phambiri, with a grunt of confidence.
‘Well, someone has to lose,’said Vijay.
‘Very true,’said Hukam Singh smugly. ‘After all, what would we do without losers? But for
Phambiri, it is win, win, all the time!’
‘And if he loses?’ persisted Vijay.
‘Then he will just forget that it happened, and will go on to win his next fight!’
Vijay found Hukam Singh’s logic almost unanswerable, but Sita, who had been puzzled by the
argument, now saw everything very clearly and said, ‘Perhaps he hasn’t won any fights as yet. Did he
lose the last one?’
‘Hush!’said Hukam Singh, looking alarmed. ‘You must not let him remember. You do not remember
losing a fight, do you, my son?’
‘I have never lost a fight,’said Phambiri with great simplicity and confidence.
‘How strange,’said Sita. ‘If you lose, how can you win?’
‘Only a soldier can explain that,’said Hukam Singh. ‘For a man who fights, there is no such thing
as defeat. You fought against the river, did you not?’
‘I went with the river,’said Sita. ‘I went where it took me.’
‘Yes, and you would have gone to the bottom if the boy had not come along to help you. He fought
the river, didn’t he?’
‘Yes, he fought the river,’said Sita.
‘You helped me to fight it,’said Vijay.
‘So you both fought,’said the old man with a nod of satisfaction. ‘You did not go with the river.
You did not leave everything to the gods.’
‘The gods were with us,’said Sita.
And so they talked, while the bullock-cart trundled along the muddy village roads. Both bullocks
were white, and were decked out for the fair with coloured beadnecklaces and bells hanging from
their necks. They were patient, docile beasts. But the cart-wheels; which were badly in need of
oiling, protested loudly, creaking and groaning as though all the demons in the world had been
trapped within them.
Sita noticed a number of birds in the paddy fields. There were black and white curlews, and cranes
with pink coat-tails. A good monsoon means plenty of birds. But Hukam Singh was not happy about
the cranes.
‘They do great damage in the wheat fields,’ he said. Lighting up a small hand-held hookah pipe, he
puffed at it and became philosophical again: ‘Life is one long struggle for the farmer. When he has
overcome the drought, survived the flood, hunted off the pig, killed the crane, and reaped the crop,
then comes that blood-sucking ghoul, the money-lender. There is no escaping him! Is your father in
debt to a money-lender, boy?’
‘No,’said Vijay.
‘That is because he doesn’t have daughters who must be married! I have two. As they resemble
Phambiri, they will need generous dowries.’
In spite of his grumbling, Hukam Singh seemed fairly content with his lot. He’d had a good maize
crop, and the front of his cart was piled high with corn. He would sell the crop at the fair, along with
some cucumbers, egg-plants and melons.
The bad road had slowed them down so much that when darkness came they were still far from
Karauli. In India there is hardly any twilight. Within a short time of the sun’s going down, the stars
were out.
‘Six miles to go,’said Hukam Singh. ‘In the dark our wheels may get stuck again. Let us spend the
night here. If it rains, we can pull an old tarpaulin over the cart.’
Vijay made a fire in the charcoal-burner which Hukam Singh had brought along, and they had a
simple meal, roasting the corn over the fire and flavouring it with salt and spices and a squeeze of
lemon. There was some milk, but not enough for everyone because Phambiri drank three tumblers by
himself.
‘If I win tomorrow,’ he said, ‘I will give all of you a feast!’
They settled down to sleep in the bullock-cart, and Phambiri and his father were soon snoring.
Vijay lay awake, his arms crossed behind his head, staring up at the stars. Sita was very tired but she
couldn’t sleep. She was worrying about her grandparents, and wondering when she would see them
again.
The night was full of sounds. The loud snoring that came from Phambiri and his father seemed to be
taken up by invisible sleepers all around them, and Sita, becoming alarmed, turned to Vijay and
asked, ‘What is that strange noise?’
He smiled in the darkness, and she could see his white teeth and the glint of laughter in his eyes.
‘Only the spirits of lost demons,’ he said, and then laughed. ‘Can’t you recognise the music of the
frogs?’
And that was what they heard — a sound more hideous than the wail of demons, a rising crescendo
of noise — wurrk, wurrk, wurrk —coming from the flooded ditches on either side of the road. All the
frogs in the jungle seemed to have gathered at that one spot, and each one appeared to have something
to say for himself. The speeches continued for about an hour. Then the meeting broke up, and silence
returned to the forest.
A jackal slunk across the road. A puff of wind brushed through the trees. The bullocks, freed from
the cart, were asleep beside it. The men’s snores were softer now. Vijay slept, a half smile on his
face. Only Sita lay awake, worried and waiting for the dawn.
AT THE FAIR
Already, at nine o’clock, the fairground was crowded. Cattle were being sold or auctioned. Stalls had
opened, selling everything from pins to ploughs. Foodstuffs were on sale — hot food, spicy food,
sweets and ices. A merry-go-round, badly oiled, was squeaking and groaning, while a loudspeaker
blared popular film music across the grounds.
While Phambiri was preparing for his wrestling match, Hukam Singh was busy haggling over the
price of pumpkins. Sita and Vijay wandered on their own among the stalls, gazing at toys and kites
and bangles and clothing, at brightly coloured, syruppy sweets. Some of the rural people had
transistor-radios dangling by straps from their shoulders, the radio music competing with the
loudspeaker. Occasionally a buffalo bellowed, drowning all other sounds.
Various people were engaged in roadside professions. There was the fortune-teller. He had slips of
paper, each of them covered with writing, which he kept in little trays along with some grain. He had
a tame sparrow. When you gave the fortune-teller your money, he allowed the little bird to hop in and
out among the trays until it stopped at one and started pecking at the grain. From this tray the fortuneteller took the slip of paper and presented it to his client. The writing told you what to expect over the
next few months or years.
A harassed, middle-aged man, who was surrounded by six noisy sons and daughters, was looking a
little concerned, because his slip of paper said: ‘Do not lose hope. You will have a child soon.’
Some distance away sat a barbar, and near him a professional ear-cleaner. Several children
clustered around a peepshow, which was built into an old gramophone cabinet. While one man wound
up the gramophone and placed a well-worn record on the turn-table, his partner pushed coloured
pictures through a slide-viewer.
A young man walked energetically up and down the fairground, beating a drum and announcing the
day’s attractions. The wrestling-bouts were about to start. The main attraction was going to be the
fight between Phambiri, described as a man ‘whose thighs had the thickness of an elephant’s trunk’,
and the local champion, Sher Dil (‘Tiger’s Heart’) — a wild-looking man, with hairy chest and
beetling brow. He was heavier than Phambiri but not so tall.
Sita and Vijay joined Hukam Singh at one corner of the akhara, the wrestling-pit. Hukam Singh
was massaging his son’s famous thighs.
A gong sounded and Sher Dil entered the ring, slapping himself on the chest and grunting like a
wild boar. Phambiri advanced slowly to meet him.
They came to grips immediately, and stood swaying from side to side, two giants pitting their
strength against each other. The sweat glistened on their well-oiled bodies.
Sher Dil got his arms round Phambiri’s waist and tried to lift him off his feet; but Phambiri had
twined one powerful leg around his opponent’s thigh, and they both came down together with a loud
squelch, churning up the soft mud of the wrestling-pit. But neither wrestler had been pinned down.
Soon they were so covered with mud that it was difficult to distinguish one from the other. There
was a flurry of arms and legs. The crowd was cheering, and Sita and Vijay were cheering too, but the
wrestlers were too absorbed in their struggle to be aware of their supporters. Each sought to turn the
other on to his back. That was all that mattered. There was no count.
For a few moments Sher Dil had Phambiri almost helpless, but Phambiri wriggled out of a crushing
grip and, using his legs once again, sent Sher Dil rocketing across the akhara. But Sher Dil landed on
his belly, and even with Phambiri on top of him, it wasn’t victory.
Nothing happened for several minutes, and the crowd became restless and shouted for more action.
Phambiri thought of twisting his opponent’s ear; but he realized that he might get disqualified for
doing that, so he restrained himself. He relaxed his grip slightly, and this gave Sher Dil a chance to
heave himself up and sent Phambiri spinning across the akhara. Phambiri was still in a sitting
position when the other took a flying leap at him. But Phambiri dived forward, taking his opponent
between the legs, and then rising, flung him backwards with a resounding thud. Sher Dil was helpless,
and Phambiri sat on his opponent’s chest to remove all doubts as to who was the winner. Only when
the applause of the spectators told him that he had won did he rise and leave the ring.
Accompanied by his proud father, Phambiri accepted the prize money, thirty rupees, and then went
in search of a tap. After he had washed the oil and mud from his body, he put on fresh clothes. Then,
putting his arms around Vijay and Sita, he said, ‘You have brought me luck, both of you. Now let us
celebrate!’ And he led the way to the sweet shops.
They ate syruppy rasgollas (made from milk and sugar) and almond-filled fudge, and little pies
filled with minced meat, and washed everything down with a fizzy orange drink.
‘Now I will buy each of you a small present,’said Phambiri.
He bought a bright blue sports’shirt for Vijay. He bought a new hookah-bowl for his father. And he
took Sita to a stall where dolls were sold, and asked her to choose one.
There were all kinds of dolls — cheap plastic dolls, and beautiful dolls made by hand, dressed in
the traditional costumes of different regions of the country. Sita was immediately reminded of Mumta,
her own rag doll, who had been made at home with Grandmother’s help. And she remembered
Grandmother, and Grandmother’s sewing-machine, and the home that had been swept away, and the
tears started to her eyes.
The dolls seemed to smile at Sita. The shopkeeper held them up one by one, and they appeared to
dance, to twirl their wide skirts, to stamp their jingling feet on the counter. Each doll made his own
special appeal to Sita. Each one wanted her love.
‘Which one will you have?’ asked Phambiri. ‘Choose the prettiest, never mind the price!’
But Sita could say nothing, she could only shake her head. No doll, no matter how beautiful, could
replace Mumta. She would never keep a doll again. That part of her life was over.
So instead of a doll Phambiri bought her bangles coloured glass bangles which slipped easily over
Sita’s thin wrists. And then he took them into a temporary cinema, a large shed made of corrugated tin
sheets.
Vijay had been in a cinema before — the towns were full of cinemas — but for Sita it was another
new experience. Many things that were common enough for other boys and girls were strange and
new for a girl who had spent nearly all her life on a small island in the middle of a big river.
As they found seats, a curtain rolled up and a white sheet came into view. A babble of talk
dwindled into silence. Sita became aware of a whirring noise somewhere not far behind her; but,
before she could turn her head to see what it was, the sheet became a rectangle of light and colour. It
came to life. People moved and spoke. A story unfolded.
But, long afterwards, all that Sita could remember of her first film was a jumble of images and
incidents. A train in danger: the audience murmuring with anxiety: a bridge over a river (but a smaller
than hers): the bridge being blown to pieces: the engine plunging into the river: people struggling in
the water: a woman rescued by a man who immediately embraced her: the lights coming on again, and
the audience rising slowly and drifting out of the theatre, looking quite unconcerned and even
satisfied. All those people struggling in the water were now quite safe, back in the little black box in
the projection room.
CATCHING THE TRAIN
And now a real engine, a steam-engine belching smoke and fire, was on its way to Sita.
She stood with Vijay on the station platform along with over a hundred other people waiting for the
Shahganj train.
The platform was littered with the familiar bedrolls (or hold-alls) without which few people in
India ever travel. On these rolls sat women, children, great-aunts and great-uncles, grandfathers,
grandmothers and grandchildren, while the more active adults hovered at the edge of the platform,
ready to leap onto the train as soon as it arrived and reserve a space for the family. In India, people
do not travel alone if they can help it. The whole family must be taken along — especially if the
reason for the journey is a marriage, a pilgrimage, or simply a visit to friends or relations.
Moving among the piles of bedding and luggage were coolies, vendors of magazines, sweetmeats,
tea, and betal-leaf preparations; also stray dogs, stray people, and sometimes a stray station-master.
The cries of the vendors mingled with the general clamour of the station and the shunting of a steamengine in the yards. ‘Tea, hot tea!,’ ‘Fresh limes!’ Sweets, papads, hot stuff, cold drinks, mangoes,
toothpowder, photos of film stars, bananas, balloons, wooden toys! The platform had become a
bazaar. What a blessing for those vendors that trains ran late and that people had to wait, and,
waiting, drank milky tea, bought toys for children, cracked peanut shells, munched bananas, and chose
little presents for the friends or relations on whom they were going to descend very shortly.
But there came the train!
The signal was down. The crowd surged forward, swamping an assistant station-master. Vijay took
Sita by the hand and led her forward. If they were too slow, they would not get a place on the
crowded train. In front of them was a tall, burly, bearded Sikh from the Punjab. Vijay decided it
would be a wise move to stand behind him and move forward at the same time.
The station bell clanged, and a big, puffing, black steam-engine appeared in the distance. A stray
dog, with a lifetime’s experience of trains, darted away across the railway lines. As the train came
alongside the platform, doors opened, window shutters fell, eager faces appeared in the openings,
and, even before the train had come to a stop, people were trying to get in or out.
For a few moments there was chaos. The crowd surged backwards and forwards. No one could get
out. No one could get in! Fifty people were leaving the train, a hundred were catching it! No one
wanted to give way. But every problem has a solution somewhere, provided one looks for it. And this
particular problem was solved by a man climbing out of a window. Others followed his example. The
pressure at the doors eased and people started squeezing into their compartments.
Vijay stayed closed to the Sikh who forged a way through the throng. The Sikh reached an open
doorway and was through. Vijay and Sita were through! They found somewhere to sit, and were then
able to look down at the platform, into the whirlpool, and enjoy themselves a little. The vendors had
abandoned the people on the platform and had started selling their wares at the windows. Hukam
Singh, after buying their tickets, had given Vijay and Sita a rupee to spend on the way. Vijay bought a
freshly split coconut, and Sita bought a comb for her disarranged hair. She had never bothered with
her hair before.
They saw a worried man rushing along the platform searching for his family; but they were already
in the compartment, having beaten him to it, and eagerly helped him in at the door. A whistle shrilled,
and they were off! A couple of vendors made last-minute transactions, then jumped from the slowmoving train. One man did this expertly with a tray of teacups balanced on one hand.
The train gathered speed.
‘What will happen to all those people still on the platform?’ asked Sita anxiously. ‘Will they all be
left behind?’
She put her head out of the window and looked back at the receding platform. It was strangely
empty. Only the vendors and the coolies and the stray dogs and the dishevelled railway staff were in
evidence. A miracle had happened. No one — absolutely no one — had been left behind!
Then the train was rushing through the night, the engine throwing out bright sparks that danced away
like fireflies. Sometimes the train had to slow down, as flood-water had weakened the embankments.
Sometimes it stopped at brightly-lit stations.
When the train started again and moved on into the dark countryside, Sita would stare through the
glass of the window, at the brightlights of a town or the quiet glow of village lamps. She thought of
Phambiri and Hukam Singh, and wondered if she would ever see them again. Already they were like
people in a fairy-tale, met briefly on the road and never seen again.
There was no room in the compartment in which to lie down; but Sita soon fell asleep, her head
resting against Vijay’s shoulder.
A MEETING AND A PARTING
Sita did not know where to look for her Grandfather. For an hour, she and Vijay wandered through the
Shahganj bazaar, growing hungrier all the time. They had no money left, and they were hot and thirsty.
Outside the bazaar, near a small temple, they saw a tree in which several small boys were helping
themselves to the sour, purple fruit.
It did not take Vijay long to join the boys in the tree. They did not object to his joining them. It
wasn’t their tree, anyway.
Sita stood beneath the tree, while Vijay threw the jamuns down to her. They soon had a small pile
of the fruit. They were on the road again, their faces stained with purple juice.
They were asking the way to the Shahganj hospital when Sita caught a glimpse of her grandfather
on the road.
At first the old man did not recognise her. He was walking stiffly down the road, looking straight
ahead, and would have walked right past the dusty, dishevelled girl, had she not charged straight at
his thin, shaky legs and clasped him round the waist.
‘Sita!’ he cried, when he had recovered his wind and his balance. ‘Why are you here? How did you
get off the island? I have been very worried — it has been bad, these last two days …’
‘Is Grandmother all right?’ asked Sita.
But even as she spoke, she knew that Grandmother was no longer with them. The dazed look in the
old man’s eyes told her as much. She wanted to, cry — not for Grandmother, who could suffer no
more, but for Grandfather, who looked so helpless and bewildered; she did not want him to be
unhappy. She forced back her tears, and took his gnarled and trembling hand; and, with Vijay walking
beside her, led the old man down the crowded street.
She knew, then, that it would be on her shoulder that Grandfather would lean in the years to come.
They decided to remain in Shahganj for a couple of days, staying at a Dharamsala — a wayside
rest-house — until the flood-waters subsided. Grandfather still had two of the goats — it had not
been necessary to sell more than one — but he did not want to take the risk of rowing a crowded boat
across to the island. The river was still fast and dangerous.
But Vijay could not stay with Sita any longer.
‘I must go now,’ he said. ‘My father and mother will be very worried, and they will not know
where to look for me. In a day or two the water will go down, and you will be able to go back to your
home.’
‘Perhaps the island has gone forever,’said Sita.
‘It will be there,’said Vijay. ‘It is a rocky island. Bad for crops, but good for a house!’
‘Will you come?’ asked Sita.
What she really wanted to say was, ‘Will you come to see me?’ but she was too shy to say it; and
besides, she wasn’t sure if Vijay would want to see her again.
‘I will come,’said Vijay. ‘That is, if my father gets me another boat!’
As he turned to go, he gave her his flute.
‘Keep it for me,’ he said. ‘I will come for it one day.’
When he saw her hesitate, he smiled and said, ‘It is a good flute!’
THE RETURN
There was more rain, but the worst was over, and when Grandfather and Sita returned to the island,
the river was no longer in spate.
Grandfather could hardly believe his eyes when he saw that the tree had disappeared — the tree
that had seemed as permanent as the island, as much a part of his life as the river itself had been. He
marvelled at Sita’s escape.
‘It was the tree that saved you,’ he said.
‘And the boy,’said Sita.
Yes, and the boy.
She thought about Vijay and wondered if she would ever see him again. Would he, like Phambiri
and Hukam Singh, be one of those people who arrived as though out of a fairy-tale and then
disappeared silently and mysteriously? She did not know it then, but some of the moving forces of our
lives are meant to touch us briefly and go their way …
And because Grandmother was no longer with them, life on the island was quite different. The
evenings were sad and lonely.
But there was a lot of work to be done, and Sita did not have much time to think of Grandmother or
Vijay or the world she had glimpsed during her journey.
For three nights they slept under a crude shelter made out of gunny-bags. During the day Sita helped
Grandfather rebuild the mud-hut. Once again, they used the big rock for support.
The trunk which Sita had packed so carefully had not been swept off the island, but the water had
got into it, and the food and clothing had been spoilt. But Grandfather’s hookah had been saved, and,
in the evenings after work was done and they had eaten their light meal which Sita prepared, he
would smoke with a little of his old contentment, and tell Sita about other floods which he had
experienced as a boy. And he would tell her about the wrestling-matches he had won, and the kites he
had flown, for he remembered a time when grown men flew kites, and great battles were fought, the
kites swooping and swerving in the sky, tangling with each other until the string of one was cut.
Kite-flying was then the sport of kings, Grandfather remembered how the Raja himself would come
down to the river-bank and join in this noble pastime. There was time in those days to spend an hour
with a gay, dancing strip of paper. Now everyone hurried, in a heat of hope, and delicate things like
kites and daydreams were trampled underfoot.
Grandfather remembered the ‘Dragon Kite’ that he had built — a great kite with a face painted on
it, the eyes made of small mirrors, the tail like a long crawling serpent. A large crowd assembled to
watch its launching. At the first attempt it refused to leave the ground. And then the wind came from
the right direction, and the Dragon Kite soared into the sky, wriggling its way higher and higher, with
the sun still glinting in its eyes. And it went very high, it pulled fiercely on the twine determined to be
free, to break loose, to live a life of its own. And eventually it did.
The twine snapped, the kite leapt away toward the sun, sailed on heavenward until it was lost to
view. It was never found again, and Grandfather wondered if he had made too vivid, too living a thing
of the great kite. He did not make another like it.
It was like her doll, thought Sita.
Mumta had been a real person, not a doll, and now Sita could not make another like her.
Sita planted a mango seed in the same spot where the peepul tree had stood. It would be many
years before it grew into a big tree, but Sita liked to imagine sitting in the branches one day, picking
the mangoes straight from the tree and feasting on them all day.
Grandfather was more particular about making vegetable garden, putting down peas, carrots, gram
and mustard.
One day, when most of the hard work had been done and the new hut was ready, Sita took the flute
which had been given to her by Vijay, and walked down to the water’s edge and tried to play it. But
all she could produce was a few broken notes, and even the goats paid no attention to her music.
Sometimes Sita thought she saw a boat coming down the river, and she would run to meet it; but
usually there was no boat, or, if there was, it belonged to a stranger or to another fisherman. And so
she stopped looking out for boats.
Slowly, the rains came to an end. The flood-waters had receded, and in the villages people were
beginning to till the land again and sow crops for the winter months. There were more cattle fairs and
wrestling matches. The days were warm and sultry. The water in the river was no longer muddy, and
one evening Grandfather brought home a huge mahseer, and Sita made it into a delicious curry.
DEEP RIVER
Grandfather sat outside the hut, smoking his hookah. Sita was at the far end of the island, spreading
clothes on the rocks to dry. One of the goats had followed her. It was the friendlier of the two and
often followed Sita about the island. She had made it a necklace of coloured beads.
She sat down on a smooth rock, and, as she did so, she noticed a small bright object in the sand
near her feet. She picked it up. It was a little wooden toy — a coloured peacock, the god Krishna’s
favourite bird — it must have come down on the river and been swept ashore on the island. Some of
the paint had been rubbed off; but for Sita, who had no toys, it was a great find.
There was a soft footfall behind her. She looked round, and there was Vijay, barefooted, standing
over her and smiling.
‘I thought you wouldn’t come,’said Sita.
‘There was much work in my village. Did you keep my flute?’
‘Yes, but I cannot play it properly.’
‘I will teach you,’said Vijay.
He sat down beside her, and they cooled their feet in the water, which was clear now, taking in the
blue of the sky. You could see the sand and the pebbles of the river-bed.
‘Sometimes the river is angry and sometimes it is kind,’said Sita.
‘We are part of the river,’said Vijay.
It was a good river, deep and strong, beginning in the mountains and ending in the sea.
Along its banks, for hundreds of miles, lived millions of people, and Sita was only one small girl
among them, and no one had ever heard of her, no one knew her — except for the old man, and the
boy, and the water that was blue and white and wonderful